**January 30, 2017**

I understand that there is stigma associated with mathematics. It’s considered boring, rote, and just a subject that everyone “struggles through”. Believe you me, I’ve been there. I have had tough times just like everyone else. But I’ve discovered that math is a beautiful, powerful being; it’s capable of describing nearly everything in our world, from rocket science (sound familiar?) to the most delicate of snowflakes.For context, I want to add that I do research in the computer science (CS) department at the University of Iowa (I’m a CS/math student). I started taking math and CS courses here when I was a senior at West High in Iowa City. While my perception may be skewed, I still have a great amount of respect for the literary arts – I was part of my school’s newspaper for two years, was an editor on West High’s student-run art and writing showcase publication, and won a Scholastic Art and Writing Silver Key. Obviously my experience is not enough to predicate any generalized, sweeping opinions, but I think I have some grounds.I feel strongly about not only mathematics, but about the notion that everyone can learn about the subject and its merits. I don’t want to try and force the “you’ll use math every day of your life so Train A leaves the station going 79,000 miles per hour…” narrative, because that’s ridiculous. Not everyone will intentionally use mathematics daily, and even fewer will use mathematics rigorously. But simply forcing students to memorize equations and perform arbitrary calculations gives no insight into the wonderfully rich and casually amazing inscription on human existence that is mathematics.Let’s start with a bit of history: the story of Fermat’s Last Theorem.Born in 1607 in a merchant town about thirty miles northwest of Toulouse, Pierre Fermat was – normal. He grew up wealthy, went to school, attended the University of Orléans, and became a lawyer. In 1626, Fermat moved to Bordeaux and became part of the Parlement there. Fluent in six (six!) languages, Fermat was a remarkable personality and even acquired a shiny new name to go with his position: Pierre de Fermat. However, his secret passion was mathematics.Fermat treated math as more of a hobby than anything else, but made significant contributions to many areas of mathematics nonetheless. He helped build the path of fundamental calculus upon which Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz walked, developed the notion of “probability” with Blaise Pascal, and even developed theorems which Leonhard Euler and Carl Gauss explored. Despite his lack of a formal proof for many of his claims, Fermat was on par with the greatest minds of his time and, as it turned out, the greatest minds of the next three hundred and fifty years.As Fermat was not a professional mathematician, he studied mathematics in his spare time. One night, he came upon the book Arithmetica, an ancient Greek mathematics book written by Diophantus in the third century. Diophantus was famous for his “Diophantine equations”, which are closely related to the Pythagorean Theorem: $ a^2 + b^2 = c^2 $. However, Fermat came up with a new question: are there any solutions to the equation $ a^n + b^n = c^n $ where $ n > 2 $? After some thought, Fermat wrote in the book that “It is impossible to separate a cube into two cubes, or a fourth power into two fourth powers, or in general, any power higher than the second, into two like powers. I have discovered a truly marvelous proof of this, which this margin is too narrow to contain.”Basically, if n > 2, the equation doesn’t work. A bold claim, especially for the relatively limited knowledge of mathematics and few mathematical tools of the time. According to Fermat (notorious for his refusal to follow through with proving things), he had a “marvelous proof” ready to spring from the tiny margin of the page and into our whetted minds. So, true to himself, guess what he did next?He died.After the funeral, Fermat’s son Clément found his dad’s copy of Arithmetica lying around the house and decided to publish a new version of the book, including Fermat’s hand-written comments. And thus, Fermat’s Last Theorem was born. Leonhard Euler, Carl Gauss, David Hilbert, Joseph Bertrand, Peter Dirichlet, Sophie Germain, and many other mathematicians tried to prove Fermat’s claim and failed. Over the years, thousands of proofs were sent in (all of them incorrect, most by amateur problem-solvers), and there was even a bounty of 100,000 Marks ($2 million in 1997) to be awarded to the eventual solver.In 1986, a professor at Princeton University decided that he was going to finally prove the theorem. He discovered it in a book at his local library when he was 10; he then decided that he wanted to solve this problem more than anything else. After years of development in elliptic curves, a Japanese theorem on modular forms (which prompted a suicide), and nearly eight years locked secretively in his office, Sir Andrew Wiles finally presented his proof of Fermat’s Last Theorem. Three hundred and fifty-eight years later, an idea constrained to eight characters was finally proven correct.A pretty wild ride, right? Considering this story, think about how Pythagoras formed a cult that would kill people if they suggested that an irrational number existed, or that the founder of computer science, Ada Lovelace, was the daughter of Lord Byron (yes, the Lord Byron). Mathematics is a storied subject with thousands of years of history, not to mention its numerous every-day applications (in case you’ve ever heard of a computer or money).Personally, I found out I loved math when I came to the University of Iowa as a senior in high school. It gave deeper meaning to the work I did in school, the subject I was going to pursue, and helped me find a new path towards what I love to do. I enjoy doing mathematics with my friends; discussing new theorems, old solutions, and new points of interest in the subject over dinner are common occurrences within my social circle.Usually, the steadfast and warm nature of mathematics is obfuscated by the amount of memorization we, as students, are forced to undertake. It’s truly unfortunate that the meaning, history, and simplicity of mathematics are lost in a sea of times tables. It’s true that mathematics hasn’t left and doesn’t leave the same footprint as literature. But with courage, effort, and understanding, we can all experience the two most important emotions of learning mathematics: profit and delight.

